the
Americans
came to the point where they were acting like, hey,
I may disagree with you about whether or not we
ought to be here in this war at all or not, but I can't
find any excuse at all for torturing American
prisoners. And the, oh, The North Vietnamese
found out about this change in attitude in a number
of different ways. When they did, that meant that
they had one of two choices with regard to us, and
that was either unite America against them or back
off on their efforts to exploit us and try to get out
of us what they want.
They backed off somewhat. They didn't stop
completely, and there were a lot of people who got
hurt very badly after that period, but it was a
whole lot better than it had been before. For
example, take the food, for example. Before that,
what was your staple, the usual type of meal, if you
will? Okay.
Generally, it consisted of either bread or rice.
Earlier in the war, It was mostly bread. Later on,
it was mostly rice, leading up to the change point
that I'm talking about. That was our staple. And
then we'd have a side dish. We called it sewer weed.
You'd see it growing along the side of the sewer
ditches. I watched guards out the slats on this
first cell that I described that had the shutters
on it. I could see down out of the shutters, and
there was a little sewer ditch. It smelled like a
sewer ditch. They walked along, picked a herd.
lunch right there, boiling. Appetizing. It was
just different kinds of greens. That was what the
majority of it was. After the change point, we
began to get some protein,
some reconstituted milk, some canned meat, some
canned beans, things like that with Russian
labels on them. more in the last year or the last six
months than earlier on, but after the change point
in the late 60s, we began to see some of those things
appear when they hadn't before to any substantial
degree. What about the physical treatment of the
soldiers? More threats and less torture. Before
the change point, they come in, yank somebody out
of the cell, and just start torturing them to get a
war crimes confession or whatever.
And having
the kind of open communications for the classes
that we talked about later on would have been
unthinkable before that time. Afterwards, you
know, if we were having a meeting, there was a class
going on, they'd come in, they'd point their
weapons at us, they'd load their weapons, And
they'd rant and rail and threat, threaten a lot.
And they might even take one guy out, but they
wouldn't hurt him very badly. More of a scare
tactic. Yeah, trying to. And when we found out that
things were changing, we adapted accordingly.
Well, that's another thing I wanted to bring up was
what kind of, how did you figure out what was the
actual true you know, news and world events versus
the propaganda. I'm sure I've heard that they had
the radio playing a lot and you would hear, you
know, about the terrible things that were going on
in America and the protesters and that nobody was
behind you and that kind of a thing. How did you
distinguish between the correct, valid news and
what they wanted you to think was going on? We did a
terrible, terrible thing, Barbara. And one of the
interrogators... observe what was going on and
really let one of our guys have it. And he accused us
of listening with our minds. And the implication
was that's the lowest thing you could do. Even in
this kind of war, that's not fair to them. In their
context, that would be unthinkable. What you hear
the party say is the answer you give back when
asked. When we hear what the party said, then
when we got pressed to the point where we had to say
something, because the pain got so great, we'd
tell them what really happened. Not what they had
said, but we got to be very good at reading their
propaganda or listening to it and figuring out
what must have really happened. And we might not
ever know exactly for sure, at least not within a
short timeframe, but we'd be close enough
to
give us a more reasonable view of what was
happening in the war and in the world and in our
country. How did the news of, again, the anti-war
protests things like that affect you? Did you
think it was greatly exaggerated or did you think
maybe they'd made the entire thing up? Initially,
we did think it was greatly exaggerated because
that hadn't been going on when people in my vintage
of shoot-down were captured. Later on, it became
apparent that there had to be some kind of a very
substantial anti-war movement going on in this
country. How did that affect your morale? Very
disappointing. At the same time, all we had to do
was look around a little bit when we were being
marched to an interrogation and say, hey, I don't
like what the protesters are doing, but I'd sure
rather live in a country where you could do that
than the way these folks have to live here. So we
talked about the feelings of nationalism really
carried a lot of people through there, and they
grew and formed a common bond. That seems to go
without saying. Can you talk a little bit about
that? It was a whole lot easier for us, because in
general terms, for us, it was very, very clear who
were the good guys and who were the bad guys. The bad
guys made it very clear who they were, and there
wasn't any doubt about it. They wouldn't tolerate
especially for the first five or six years,
they wouldn't even tolerate somebody who just
didn't constantly bump heads with them, much less
somebody who was overtly hostile to them. And
later on, that changed. Interesting, because I
was going to ask you what you thought the
difference between You hear so many people now,
you know, writing books or speaking out against
the war, and they're very bitter and cynical and
jaded and think they've been betrayed. And then
you'll speak to former POWs who say, very
patriotic, very nationalistic. Do you think it's
the two experiences that were so different? Yes.
Very different.
When we came home, we were treated like heroes.
Like... We just, oh, let's see. I had to be careful
when I came home what I admired. Because every time
I turned around, whatever I admired, somebody
would give to me. People just could not do enough
for us.
When the guys who went over there and did the same
kind of thing I was doing before I got shot down,
whether it was in the air or on the ground or out in
the Gulf of Tonkin, When they came home,
they were, in the
minds of a lot of people in this country, held in
less esteem than the Viet Cong. What do you think
that is?
I don't think there is a simple answer to that
question. I think
they were blamed for a lot of things they didn't do.
The media did an abominable job on that war.
As far as the media was concerned in general,
whatever the Viet Cong did, was,
oh, whether or not you agreed with their politics,
if it was a brave kind of thing, you know, a little
guy going up against a big giant, it was heroic. If
they did something that we would consider
abominable, it was no less than what was expected
from them because they come from a different
culture where human life is not held in high
regard. When we...
When we looked cross-eyed,
we were condemned for it by the media. We were
fighting in a situation that was unlike anything
we had ever run up against before.
We were fighting a communist enemy. We were
fighting an Oriental enemy. The Orients
overpopulated. Individual lives have not had the
importance over there that they have in much of the
rest of the world. You put that combination
together, the Orient and communism, and for a
mother to take her little baby and stuff a hand
grenade in the diaper and have the little baby walk
up to the jeep, blow up the jeep and a couple of GIs,
to them was a heroic act. For us to turn around and
shoot the mother for doing that, to keep her from
killing a whole bunch more was absolutely
unthinkable.
I think that's a bit of a fault in our culture. And to
a degree, the media had picked up on our culture in
the way they interpreted things.
But I
would say As far as the Vietnam War was concerned,
everything that I have seen that the media did,
I would have to categorize as extremely
subjective. There was no objectivity on their
part at all. I was going to ask you this at the end,
but I'll go ahead and jump to it. What do you feel
about the, now there's this big media fad, you
know, the Vietnam movies, all the Rambo stuff, the
TV shows. Now everybody's a big hero, or it's kind
of a display of everybody's personal
experiences. I mean, there's a variety of
attitudes about the war now. Do you feel that any of
the films have been accurate, or are they just out
to make a buck? Any of the TV shows? Why do you think
suddenly it's such a big deal? OK.
I'm not sure why it's such a big deal, but there
seems to be a national willingness to go look at it
now, when for years we didn't even want to think
about it, much less look at it. Maybe distance? A
little more objective?
Well, there's a new generation that's looking at
it now. And I'm sure that makes a difference. I
don't know how to quantify how much difference it
makes. I'm sure that kind of thing helps. As far as
the quality of what I've seen, in general, the
Hollywood and the made-for-TV movies,
they are still...
They're still down on Americans. It's not as,
well, it is just about as hostile toward the
American GI who fought in Southeast Asia now as the
media was when it was going on. There are a few
exceptions.
There are very few. One of the first that I saw that I
thought was good, and these are both connected
with the POW thing, and I feel a little more
qualified to talk there, but the first one made
several years ago was when Hell was in Session, Hal
Holbrook playing Jerry Dent.
The second was more recent. The title of it was
Hanoi Hilton.
It's one of the best movies I've ever seen.
not just Vietnam movies, but best movies, and the
reason is
it was atypical for a Hollywood movie. There
wasn't a John Wayne who would walk in, overcome
overwhelming odds, never feel fear or pain, or
have a tear in his eye, and ride off into the sunset
with just his horse when it was over. Sylvester
Stallone. Yeah. It was real people who had some
virtues and some weaknesses. And they were the
guys that I knew there who did the best they could
with what they had. They hurt. They cried. They had
a few victories. But when it was over, they could
still hold their heads up. And the irony of it was
when it was over, 350 American POWs went to war
against 17 million North Vietnamese, and the
North Vietnamese had all the guns and the leg irons
and the handcuffs and the bars and the keys, and we
won. We accomplished what we wanted to do with
regard to our relationship to them and to the war.
They failed at what they wanted to do. with regard
to, in respect to their relationship with us and
their intentions as to how they were to exploit us
for the war. That got a little bit off the track, but
that movie The Hanoi Hilton
was, it was really condemned before it ever got
out. Because while she was not named, Jane Fonda in
character appeared in the movie And I don't know
whether Jane Fonda just has that many friends or
what, but the movie was panned by the critics. And
it shouldn't have been. I think one of the reasons
that it turned out so good was the list of people
they had as advisors in the credits. I knew those
guys. And they listened to the people who were
there. For a change. Yes, for a change. Well, let's
jump back quickly to the very, very end when
finally getting released. How did you, did you
know it was coming? Did you know that the end was on
its way? By increasing the treatment to where they
used to, they were giving you more and more food,
trying to make you look a little bit better. Did you
get the hint that okay, the day is coming? We worked
in probabilities and not absolutes. We used to,
among ourselves, jokingly refer to
the anticipation when we would see small or large
improvements in our treatment, and the food, the
way the guards acted to us, et cetera, we refer to
times of improved treatment as peace scares.
Because that seemed to be the way the North
Vietnamese looked at it. Oh my gosh. We may have to
give some of these guys back. We may have to stop
prosecuting the war the way we are now. that was the
reason for the nomenclature. And we knew that that
things had reached a level regarding the
potential for our release and proceeded onward
that they hadn't reached before. The way the North
Vietnamese were acting toward us, were treating
us, etc. At the same time, Even after I was on the
plane and the rest of the guys felt the same way
headed out of Hanoi, we didn't relax and let all our
weight down on the airplane until we were out of
mid-range. Because there had been enough false
starts and regressions to know that it's not over
until it's really over. So it was a mixed bag.
Tremendous anticipation. and matching desire,
but great restraint. We've been disappointed so
many times. What about the big reception in
Washington, D.C.? President Nixon? Talk a little
bit about that because I'm vaguely remembering
that on television.
What was their overall, maybe of your friends,
their attitude towards Nixon as president?
Because again, there was so much protest. And were
you amazed to come back and find so much hostility
towards him? Yeah, I was. First of all, I guess,
like any mortal human being, Nixon's a little bit
of a mixed bag. Some things he did toward the end,
were dumb and shameful. Specifically with the
bombings, perhaps? No, I'm not talking about the
war. I'm talking about Watergate and those sort of
things.
He took a lot of heat over what he did at the end of the
war. He was, at the same time, one of the first
people to stand up, bite the bullet, and do what had
to be done. We needed to bomb North Vietnam. We
didn't want to, but that was the source of trouble.
Specifically, we needed to bomb Hanoi, because
that was the core of it. And until we did, the war
wasn't going to end. I wish so much that some of the
people who are critical of that sort of thing
could be in a war and see what happens. Because in
war, in this war, we were the only one that fought by
any rules. And in general, any enemy you go up
against, as far as we're concerned, isn't going to
have any rules. The only rule is win if you can.
When we started bombing North Vietnam, excuse me,
when we started bombing Hanoi, the war was over.
And... Let's see, what was his name, Bonnie, the
senior officer?
Flynn, General Flynn. He was a full colonel when he
was shot down. But he said, when we started hearing
the bombs fall on Hanoi, he said, we started
packing our bags because we knew we were going home
pretty soon, but they didn't stop right away.
Watching the reaction of the North Vietnamese
told the whole story of the war in a period of about a
week there. and I guess the most concise
description of it is one of the guards who low level
interrogator who spoke a little bit of English
coming up to one of the barred windows and opening
the hatch and looking in at us kind of talking to us
but not really talking to us
and just incredulous look demeanor and attitude
that had never been there before and basically his
words were Nixon's gone crazy he's gonna kill us
what had happened up to that point Barbara was
North Vietnam had been able to conduct the war
and exactly determine what the consequences of
the war to them were going to be at any point along
the way. And if they started feeling a little more
discomfort than they wanted to, all they had to do
was say, drop some kind of a hint that maybe they'd
talk about peace. We'd stop the bombing in North
Vietnam. We'd give them a chance to resupply in the
North. We'd give them a chance to resupply in the
South. We'd give them a chance to get ready to go all
over again, build back up to full strength And then
they'd say, no, we don't like you guys anymore.
We're going to fight some more. And they played the
on-again, off-again game all the way, and their
idea was just to drag it out until we got tired of
fighting. Because they weren't getting tired.
Right. Well, they were getting tired, but they
were willing to pay the price. At least their
leaders were willing to keep making them pay the
price. And they didn't really have a whole lot of
other options anyway. the people who were doing
the work when President Nixon ordered the bombing
of Hanoi he
didn't give them the option he took away the option
they had had up to that point of deciding what their
losses were going to be and he prosecuted the war
the way a war ought to be prosecuted at least at that
point if you're going to be in it And that is either
you win it or you die trying.
There isn't anything you gain by coming in second
in a war. We didn't want to dominate North Vietnam.
We didn't want to make North Vietnam capitalist or
democratic. All we wanted them to do was stop
forcefully exporting what they had. And when
President Nixon started bombing Hanoi, He took
their options away and, in effect, was saying, you
guys stop and you end this on terms that are
acceptable to us for your history. No other
choices are we going to leave. As soon as that
message was clearly communicated to North
Vietnam, of course, Ho Chi Minh had died a few years
earlier. But North Vietnamese leadership just
suddenly had 32 chicklets showing between their
lips. And it's, yes, sir, is there anything else we
can do for you? That was their attitude at the
negotiating table. It was their attitude toward
us. Everything else. And as soon as we, in terms
they could understand, which was for us,
communicated to them that what they were doing was
not going to be tolerated anymore and that the
choice was theirs either to die trying it,
continue to try it, or stop it and live, And the rest
was just settling the details at that point.
So when you finally met him at the dinner, what did
he have to say to you? Or what possibly did you have
to say to him? Well, I guess our message to him was
thank you. Because he was the one who finally did
not only what was necessary to end the war, at least
at that point, and
obtain an agreement from them to stop forcing
their way on South Vietnam, which was what we had
gone over there to do, too. So it let us win the war,
even though we did it in adverse circumstances.
But it also got us home. No other way would we have
come home. There may have been a few trickle home,
like a few guys they let go early. But they
weren't going to let us go home. Not the entire
group.
Two weeks after I got home, Bonnie and I and another
Dallas POW and his wife were invited by
Congressman Teague, who had really been a friend
to our families. And my family wasn't even in his
district, but he had really been a friend to our
families. He was an Aggie, by the way. The Teague
building is named after him. Okay. Congressman
Olin Teague. Something familiar. Right.
He invited us. He was Mr. Veteran. He was Chairman
of the House Veteran Affairs Committee, among
other things, as well as the Space Committee. But
he invited us to go with him to the National VFW
Convention. Excuse me. It was the VFW dinner for
Congress. At that time, he arranged for us to have a
tour of the White House. You know, get the tickets
for us, like the congressman can do. And it was to be
a a private tour for the four of us, a guided tour,
rather than a big group thing. While we were on the
tour, obviously what happened behind the scenes
was he called the president, said, hey, you got two
POWs over there. So one of the president's staff
men located us, said, President Nixon has heard
that you're here. We'd like to have a visit with you
in the Oval Office. So we were escorted in, the four
of us, and spent a little over an hour, I guess, in
the Oval Office. While we were there, Henry
Kissinger came in. But we just got to, basically we
got to sit down, the four of us, and have a nice talk
with President Nixon. He was a man who had sat in a
chair that, I would say, very few people could sit
in and still keep their sanity and maybe sometimes
he didn't he had he
had probably the most intense and diverse
pressures of any recent president anyway he was
handed a bucket of worms when he came in i think the
the fact of of his election uh the last one by the
margin that it was, indicated that there was
certainly a preference of what he was doing to the
alternatives, at least as far as the nation was
concerned. And I think that's probably the reason
for the idea of the silent majority.
My personal feeling was I think he felt glad to meet
a friend. because that was the way he perceived us,
at least compared to a lot of people. I don't mean a
personal friend, but somebody who was friendly
toward him instead of finding something about one
of his policies to criticize. And I think he was
just a very pulled and torn man during that time who
had decided what he thought ought to be done and
made some hard decisions to go ahead and do it, even
though it was going to be unpopular. And it might
cost him a whole lot more than he'd really like to
pay. And I think it did. Would you like to talk at all
a little bit about, so many people talk about their
spiritual background and how within the camps
that really got them through. Would you say that's
something that was a necessity for you as you were
there? Or was it something that developed while
you were there? I would say it was something that
was almost universally recognized.
There were four men out of all the POWs that I knew,
and I got to know almost all of them to some degree,
who were professing atheists. The rest had some
kind of profession of faith in God, as I know him as a
Christian. Most were Christian. There were a few
Jews.
God was openly acknowledged, openly prayed to,
and jointly prayed to. And
there's absolutely no doubt in my mind, Barbara,
that he's the one who protected us, who kept us
alive, who even though he didn't give us as much as
we would have liked to eat at times, he gave us
enough to keep us alive. And enabled
us to win the kind of victory I talked about a while
ago where there was 17 million of them, 350 of us,
and it wasn't even a fair fight for the North
Vietnamese. We had about a number. That kind of
thing There were just too many things that would
have forced other results than what we saw. The
North Vietnamese wanted nothing more of us than to
get out of us what they could and kill us in the
slowest, most painful way possible and cause
grief to ourselves and our family and our nation.
They caused a lot of grief, but they lost their
objective. Would you ever, or have you,
considered going back to visit? I know a lot of the,
some of the vets and POWs go back for various
reasons. Have you ever considered it or do you want
to someday? I didn't leave anything there that I
need.
I, at least up to this point, as long as I'm given the
choice, I would choose not to go back.
it's still a dangerous place to be. And it's
got a lot of memories that
having once dealt with them, I'm happier and
healthier leaving them alone. Yeah. Would you, if
you were, from your personal opinion, going to
recommend, say, several books that would, in your
opinion, accurately describe the experience.
What would those be? There have been so many
written. For the interested scholar, what, in
your opinion, would be a good thing to read? Okay,
there are a lot of them that I have not read. I
have not, those that I have read, I haven't read any
bad ones. The ones that I've appreciated the most
were In
the Presence of Mine Enemies by Harold Rutledge,
Passing of the Night by Robbery Reisner,
With God in a POW Camp by Ralph Gaither, and the one
that I just referred to you, In Love and War by Jim
and Sybil Stockdale.
I would say from a historical point of view, the
book by Jim and Sybil Stockdale would be the most
useful. They are both
very active, very intelligent people and are able
to
to be more objective than most could be about
things that impacted upon them so personally and
so intensely. Okay. Well, good. There's so many to
choose from. Thank you very much. I appreciate it.
You're welcome, Barbara.